guide_en.md, before:

# Introduction

***by Hugo Pompougnac***

For the revolutionary activist, AI[^1] is primarily a matter of political economy.The media and political establishment that sings its praises thereby sings the praises of neoliberal capitalism, the unbridled entrepreneurship that reigns in Silicon Valley, the data industry, the individualization of social life, the domination of labor by capital, and the overexploitation of resources[^2]. Activist discourse therefore spontaneously takes the opposite stance: it denounces the propaganda of Sam Altman and his friends[^3], whose techno-capitalist utopia is becoming less and less credible. We are up in arms over the sufferings that corporations inflict on workers under the pretext of innovation. We question the impact of emerging practices on our common humanity, for instance by wondering whether people will still be able to think for themselves in the future.

There is, of course, one essential aspect of the problem that remains to be addressed. AI is a general-purpose information processing technology[^4], just like printed books, photography, and film. Therefore, activist groups are embracing it, perhaps tentatively, with varying degrees of perspective, but they are embracing it nonetheless. Here in France, for example, social media has been flooded all summer with AI-generated caricatures of François Bayrou (the former prime minister). Beyond images, it is not uncommon to come across a comrade who uses AI to simplify the reading of a parliamentary report or the translation of a text.

However, these militant uses of AI have two limitations:

1- They sometimes lack perspective. Using a generative AI chatbot effectively and reworking the results is difficult, but absolutely essential if we want to avoid inadvertently spreading misinformation or degrading political discourse. In fact, this type of software can be very useful, but at some point it will make mistakes, either because it "*hallucinates*" due to limitations in its design, or because it has been asked a question that is too vague. This can result in mixed information, invented sources, problematic symbolism, etc. This is not a problem as long as the user is careful and anticipates or corrects errors, but it can cause serious problems if care is not taken.
2- They are not equally adopted across the population, with very different rates depending on class -- obviously -- but also on age and place of residence, as new technologies penetrate much more slowly in the suburbs and countryside than in city centers.

And yet, we believe that the radical left must become collectively proficient in AI. The challenge is technical -- it's about working more efficiently -- but it's also political, in the sense of the actual struggle itself. The ease with which we use 21st-century tools will lend us credibility, give confidence to our supporters, and, at the same time, discourage our opponents: neo-liberals, the far right, etc. Indeed, it is never encouraging to feel outdated or archaic.

That is the intention of this guide. It is designed so that anyone can dive right in, with or without prior computer knowledge, and make rapid progress. We wanted it to be useful for beginners and experienced users alike, with descriptions of advanced techniques for getting the most out of AI.

The version we are publishing today is a very early release of the guide. Many aspects are imperfect or incomplete. We intend to improve it as our work progresses and as we receive feedback from comrades. Please feel free to share your comments, criticisms, and suggestions with us at contact@espaces-marx.eu!

Until then... Happy reading!


[^1]: The word AI, for "Artificial Intelligence," is clearly misleading and belongs more to the realm of science fiction than to technical description. In fact, intelligence is a complex phenomenon that this kind of software is still a long way from being able to simulate. However, the term has made its way into public discourse, so we've decided to use it to make this guide more accessible, or at least to avoid creating barriers to reading by using less common terms. The software we refer to when we talk about AI is therefore essentially large language models based on the Transformer architecture that users manipulate through a chat-type interface.

[^2]: The Shift Project, "_Intelligence artificielle, données calcul : quelles infrastructures dans un monde décarboné?_", 2025

[^3]: Sam Altmann, _The Intelligence Age_, 2024

[^4]: Fondation Copernic, _Que faire de l'IA ? Entre risque et opportunité pour la transformation sociale et écologique_, 2025

# How to use AI ?

# Is AI useful for activists ?

# Prompting like a pro

# Wrap-up

# Annexes

Commit message:

guide_en: (wrap-up) add conclusion translation (#16)
* Add conclusion translation

* Fix author attribution format

guide_en.md, after:

# Introduction

***by Hugo Pompougnac***

For the revolutionary activist, AI[^1] is primarily a matter of political economy.The media and political establishment that sings its praises thereby sings the praises of neoliberal capitalism, the unbridled entrepreneurship that reigns in Silicon Valley, the data industry, the individualization of social life, the domination of labor by capital, and the overexploitation of resources[^2]. Activist discourse therefore spontaneously takes the opposite stance: it denounces the propaganda of Sam Altman and his friends[^3], whose techno-capitalist utopia is becoming less and less credible. We are up in arms over the sufferings that corporations inflict on workers under the pretext of innovation. We question the impact of emerging practices on our common humanity, for instance by wondering whether people will still be able to think for themselves in the future.

There is, of course, one essential aspect of the problem that remains to be addressed. AI is a general-purpose information processing technology[^4], just like printed books, photography, and film. Therefore, activist groups are embracing it, perhaps tentatively, with varying degrees of perspective, but they are embracing it nonetheless. Here in France, for example, social media has been flooded all summer with AI-generated caricatures of François Bayrou (the former prime minister). Beyond images, it is not uncommon to come across a comrade who uses AI to simplify the reading of a parliamentary report or the translation of a text.

However, these militant uses of AI have two limitations:

1- They sometimes lack perspective. Using a generative AI chatbot effectively and reworking the results is difficult, but absolutely essential if we want to avoid inadvertently spreading misinformation or degrading political discourse. In fact, this type of software can be very useful, but at some point it will make mistakes, either because it "*hallucinates*" due to limitations in its design, or because it has been asked a question that is too vague. This can result in mixed information, invented sources, problematic symbolism, etc. This is not a problem as long as the user is careful and anticipates or corrects errors, but it can cause serious problems if care is not taken.
2- They are not equally adopted across the population, with very different rates depending on class -- obviously -- but also on age and place of residence, as new technologies penetrate much more slowly in the suburbs and countryside than in city centers.

And yet, we believe that the radical left must become collectively proficient in AI. The challenge is technical -- it's about working more efficiently -- but it's also political, in the sense of the actual struggle itself. The ease with which we use 21st-century tools will lend us credibility, give confidence to our supporters, and, at the same time, discourage our opponents: neo-liberals, the far right, etc. Indeed, it is never encouraging to feel outdated or archaic.

That is the intention of this guide. It is designed so that anyone can dive right in, with or without prior computer knowledge, and make rapid progress. We wanted it to be useful for beginners and experienced users alike, with descriptions of advanced techniques for getting the most out of AI.

The version we are publishing today is a very early release of the guide. Many aspects are imperfect or incomplete. We intend to improve it as our work progresses and as we receive feedback from comrades. Please feel free to share your comments, criticisms, and suggestions with us at contact@espaces-marx.eu!

Until then... Happy reading!


[^1]: The word AI, for "Artificial Intelligence," is clearly misleading and belongs more to the realm of science fiction than to technical description. In fact, intelligence is a complex phenomenon that this kind of software is still a long way from being able to simulate. However, the term has made its way into public discourse, so we've decided to use it to make this guide more accessible, or at least to avoid creating barriers to reading by using less common terms. The software we refer to when we talk about AI is therefore essentially large language models based on the Transformer architecture that users manipulate through a chat-type interface.

[^2]: The Shift Project, "_Intelligence artificielle, données calcul : quelles infrastructures dans un monde décarboné?_", 2025

[^3]: Sam Altmann, _The Intelligence Age_, 2024

[^4]: Fondation Copernic, _Que faire de l'IA ? Entre risque et opportunité pour la transformation sociale et écologique_, 2025

# How to use AI ?

# Is AI useful for activists ?

# Prompting like a pro

# Wrap-up

***by Hugo Pompougnac***

You have reached the end of this short guide (excluding the annexes). We do hope you enjoyed reading it, or at least found it useful. If so, we have a favor to ask of you. As mentioned in the introduction, this version of the guide is still very much a work in progress. We believe there is plenty to add, perhaps remove, correct, and improve. With this in mind, our primary concern is its usefulness to activists, so your feedback after reading it is very important. Please email us at contact@espaces-marx.eu with any comments, criticism, or suggestions.

You can also write to us if you would like to actively contribute to the writing process. If you are comfortable with digital tools, we invite you to interact with us via GitHub, visit the guide repository (github.com/espaces-marx/ai-radicals), fork it, and send us a Pull Request. We welcome all contributions and would be happy to build a larger activist community, working together to develop skills so that the left can better master new technologies.

For the moment, our intention for the next version of the guide is to:  

- Provide concrete examples and in-depth explanations of "advanced" AI tools (agents, connectors, libraries, etc.).
- Detail other tools; for now, we have focused on Mistral, although much of our advice applies equally well to other AIs.
- Provide more specific advice on AI-assisted data synthesis (summarizing a legal text, etc.).
- Teach AI-assisted graphic design techniques: not just by writing a trivial prompt and marveling at the result, but by combining AI with other techniques to create a poster, sticker, Instagram visual, etc.

Looking ahead, we would like to explain (in the clearest way possible) how to retrain an AI model at home to transform its purpose. But that's a more geeky goal; for the time being, we believe there are more pressing matters.

If you would like to comment on these objectives or suggest others, please contact us at our email address.

*Arrivederci!*

# Annexes
